I don't know what to do.
I don't know what decision to make.
Have you ever said that?
You may be in that situation right now,
perhaps the decision you're facing
is dealing with a family issue,
or perhaps trying to choose a medical path
for a serious health problem,
or maybe it has something to do with your work assignment.
Then to further complicate matters,
it may be that there's no right or wrong answer,
but rather a number of options,
each with their own advantages or disadvantages.
And then we add the uncertainty of our times,
and we may be frozen and just cannot make a decision.
Well, we've all been in that situation.
Well, our text for today and some surrounding verses,
give us some points that can help us.
Let's look at our scripture text again
in Hebrews chapter six and verse one.
Hebrews six and verse one,
this is therefore now that we have moved
beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ,
let us press on to maturity.
Yes, we're to press on to maturity.
Now, you notice this first starts off with therefore.
That means it links back to what Paul was talking about previously.
And you go back to chapter five and verse 11,
he's talking about those who were not mature.
They should have been, but they weren't,
and they needed solid food.
Why?
Let's look at verse 14.
Hebrews chapter five, verse 14,
but solid food belongs to mature people.
To those who through use have their powers of discernment
trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
See, spiritual maturity gives us power.
Gives us powers of discernment
and those powers of discernment allow us to make decisions,
to be able to use principles to see how to make decisions
when things are unclear or there's no rule to guide us.
So with that in mind, we're going to consider three points.
Number one, why is spiritual maturity needed
to make decisions based on principles?
At number two, how do we use principles
to help us make decisions?
And number three, what Bible examples or example
gives us confidence that we can successfully face
naughty and complicated decisions
even if we're on our own.
So let's start with our first point.
Why is spiritual maturity needed
to make decisions based on principles?
Well, picture, if you will, that you walk up to a door
and the sign on that door says, do not enter.
At verses you walk up to another door
and the sign on that door says, proceed with caution.
Now, the first is very clear.
You don't go in.
It's a rule.
But the other one, we have a decision
to make, should I go in?
Why do I have caution?
Do I need a hard hat?
What's on the other side of that door?
Or let's say you drive onto a road
and there's a sign that says, speed limit 65.
Versus driving onto a road and the sign says, drive safely.
Again, the first one, we know exactly what to do.
I can go right to 65 and keep it there.
On the other one, I have a decision to make.
How fast should I drive?
What is safe driving on this road?
Or to complicate matters further,
let's say the sign on that door just says caution
and the road sign just says, travel at your own risk.
Now, what do I do?
Do I even go near the door?
Do I even drive onto that road?
But what's the point?
The point is, is that where there's a rule,
we don't have to think generally.
We may not like the rule, but we generally know what to do.
But it takes greater effort if there is no rule
or the more ambiguous the situation becomes.
Thus the need for spiritual maturity.
So at least our second point is that
is how do we go about using principles
to help us make decisions?
And we know we should.
We're told all the time to do that, but how do we do it?
Well, first, we have to identify Bible principles
that fit our situation.
That doesn't mean just grabbing the first scriptures
that come to mind or gathering scriptures
to support what we think should be done.
No, determining what principles apply to this situation.
Now, how do we do that?
Well, depending on the complexity of our situation,
our decision, it takes time.
It takes research, meditation, prayer,
may mean writing things down in a notebook
and thinking about it over time.
But now, here's a question.
What if you are struggling to find a principle
to deal with the decision you're facing right now?
Well, here is one that you can start with
and it works every time.
Let's look at Matthew, chapter 22.
And we're very familiar with this.
Matthew 22, 37 through 39.
Remember the man came and asked Jesus,
give me the greatest law.
Give me the greatest commandment in the law.
What did Jesus say?
Matthew 22, 37.
You must love Jehovah your God
with your whole heart and with your whole soul
and with your whole mind.
This is the greatest in the first commandment.
The second like it is this.
You must love your neighbor as yourself.
So here Jesus in his perfect economy of words
gave us who we need to consider
while making a decision.
And the order of priority in which the way the options.
So first of who do we have to consider?
Well, obviously we say Jehovah and our neighbor,
but you notice that's not all.
It says Jehovah our neighbor and ourselves.
And also what is the order of priority?
Well, obviously Jehovah is the first priority.
And then generally we put love of neighbor ahead of our self
because we consider our neighbor superior to us
another principle.
But you notice this says love your neighbor as your self.
So that means there may be times when we have to weigh
how this affects me a little bit ahead of my neighbor.
Love Jehovah, love my neighbor, love myself.
So how does doing this or not doing this?
So how do these options reflect on my relationship
with Jehovah or affect my relationship with Jehovah?
How do these options affect Jehovah's name in the community?
How does doing this or not doing this
or these options affect my neighbor?
Who are my neighbors that are affected by this decision?
Remembering that our closest neighbor is our family members.
How does doing this or not doing this affect me?
So as a test, I encourage you to take whatever decision,
whatever situation that you may be struggling with right now
and prayerfully use this principle as a starting point.
And you may be amazed at the clarity it gives you
and the other principles that it opens up to guide you.
Well, what's the point?
The point is that principles can help us make decisions
when things are unclear.
But we need spiritual maturity.
And frankly, now is the time that we have to grow
to spiritual maturity so that we can make decisions
based on Bible principles.
Why?
Well, because as we get deeper and deeper
into the time of the end, we know it out
are going to face situations that are more complicated,
more challenging, and we may even be on our own.
For example, what happens if we're cut off
from our brothers and sisters?
Or we are in uncharted times as we've been in this past year.
What do we do then?
Well, we will be just fine if we have Jehovah's Spirit
and spiritual maturity.
But that leads to our third question.
And that is what Bible example gives us confidence
that we can face even naughty and complicated decisions.
Well, the prophet Daniel provides such a comforting example
for us.
We know that in the early part of Daniel,
he had his three Hebrew companions with him
to bounce ideas and thoughts off of.
But we notice there's no mention of them later on
in the book of Daniel.
What would he do then?
Well, Daniel had very difficult decisions to navigate.
In fact, turn if you will, the Daniel chapter 5 and verse 12
and it gives us an inkling of what he had to deal with.
Daniel 5 and verse 12, it says Daniel had an extraordinary spirit
and knowledge and insight to interpret dreams,
to explain riddles and to solve naughty problems.
Oh my, he could solve naughty problems.
Can you imagine if we could solve naughty problems
or as the footnote says, untie knots?
Well, what naughty problems did Daniel have to deal with
when he was there in Babylon?
Well, we don't know all of them,
but the few of them that we do know
were incredibly difficult and serious.
How did he do it?
How did he make good decisions?
Well, Daniel was a spiritual man.
He had a depth of spiritual maturity.
We know he was a man of prayer.
So much so that almost got him killed
when the law said he wasn't allowed to pray.
He kept praying anyway.
He relied on Jehovah, on Jehovah's Spirit.
Daniel was also a student of the Bible.
Remember in Daniel chapter 9 and verse 2,
it says that he discerned from his reading
and examining the sacred books when the 70 years would end.
So he would read God's word and benefit from it.
At Daniel chapter 5 and verse 11 says,
at Daniel had the spirit of the holy gods.
Yes, because of spiritual maturity,
he was guided by holy spirit
and he was able to make difficult decisions
even though he may have been cut off
or he may have been alone.
So may each one of us be determined to work hard
to press on to spiritual maturity,
train ourselves to think in terms of principles
rather than rules and how these can guide our life.
And if we do, which Jehovah's help,
we too will be able to navigate
whatever naughty problems we face in these last days.